\section{Introduction}
In Belgium, one man in three and one woman in four face cancer before their 75th
birthday \cite{kanker} In 2010, 62.017 new cases of cancer were diagnosed
according to \cite{kankerliga}. Moreover, the World Health Organisation
estimates the worldwide death toll from lung cancer will be 10.000.000 by 2030,
which makes it one of the deadliest cancers \cite{gu, zheng}. Fortunately, an
early detection can increase the survival rate up to 70-80\% \cite{swensen} and
will broaden the amount of treatment options \cite{greenlee}. Therefore, a wide
range of studies have focused on this topic. The only way to detect lung cancer
in an early stage is by examining a patient's scan carefully. Currently, expert
radiologists perform the investigation of the computed tomography (CT) scans.
They use the shape, the texture, the location and the growth rate of the volume
of the nodule as clinical parameters to determine the malignancy of the nodules
and to decide on the diagnosis of lung cancer \cite{wu}. Nevertheless, the
examination of these scans is a time-consuming task and is not free from errors.
Therefore, there is an increasing demand for methods that provide assistance
to the radiologist in performing this difficult task.

Fortunately, due to recent developments in CT technology it is possible nowadays
to obtain near isotropic, submillimeter resolution images of the complete chest
in a single breath hold. This high resolution has the advantage that it enables
visualisation of small and low-contrast nodules that could hardly be screened in
conventional programs. But although small nodules are in principle detectable in
CT scans, a non-negligible fraction may be overlooked if they are situated in a
maze of vessels of similar size \cite{ozekes}. An example of a nodule hidden in
a maze of vessels is shown in \autoref{nodmaze}.
\begin{figure}[htp]
\begin{center}
  \includegraphics[width= 30 mm]{img/noduleMaze.png}
  \caption{Nodule in maze of vessels of similar size \cite{wiemkerfig}.}
  \label{nodmaze}
\end{center}
\end{figure}
The downside of these recent developments towards high resolution images is
that enormous amounts of data are generated which increase the work load of radiologists.
Especially since low-dose CT scans are more and more implemented in routine
screenings. Still, this is no idle measure. Long nodules are very commonly
detected on CT scans. Research shows that up to 51\% of smokers aged 50 years or
older have pulmonary lung nodules in CT scans \cite{mahon}. Therefore, the
United States Preventive Services Task Force stated that it ``recommends annual
screening for lung cancer with low-dose computed tomography in adults
aged 55 to 80 years who have a 30 pack-year smoking history and currently smoke
or have quit within the past 15 years'' \cite{ups}. Measures like this may
enhance the early stage detection of lung cancers, but the workload of
radiologists will be increased tremendously. No wonder the detection of
pulmonary nodules in volumetric CT scans is one of the most studied
computer-aided detection (CAD) applications \cite{sluimer}. There is a need for
a CAD system that can assist the radiologist in the detection of pulmonary nodules.

The goal of this project is to develop a fully automated algorithm for the
detection of pulmonary nodules in CT scans. The algorithm will be established as
a cascaded classifier which is a robust and fast machine learning algorithm.
This algorithm will classify each voxel of the 3D images by assigning a
nodule-probability to each of them. One of the challenges is the selection of
the features that will be extracted from the image. The fact that some nodules
are embedded in surrounding tissue (e.g. lung wall, blood vessel, etc.) and the
fact that some nodules demonstrate very irregular shapes prevents us from using
simple spherical template matching which might seem an obvious choice at first
for pulmonary lung detection. In order to select the right classifier and list
of features, a non-exhaustive literature review is performed. Commercial and
non-commercial CAD systems for nodule detection and their performances are
discussed. Of course, in order to design an accurate and efficient CAD system,
one needs to understand the biology of lung nodules so that topic is also
briefly touched. Next, a short theoretical background on image processing, with
a focus on feature extraction and selection, and machine learning is provided.
Both topics will be related to findings in the literature. The statistical
measures used for assessing the performance of classifiers are also briefly
discussed as they might not be trivial in this project. Subsequently, the
methodology that was established in this project is explained from the
acquisition of the datasets and the preprocessing of the data to the training,
testing and validating of the algorithm. The advantages and disadvantages of
every step are discussed and the final results are presented. Finally, the main
conclusions from the project are summarized and suggestions for future research
are made. In the appendix the reader can find the reports of the weekly meetings
with the supervisors, the Gantt chart and the logbook.






